This is the biggest reason why people
plateau. You know how many people I work
with and I have an onboarding call with
them and I say, "What is your biggest
problem in the gym?" And I'd say 90% of
the times they plateaued. They're not
moving forward. My number one response
to those people is set yourself up this
way. And they say, "Ah, I I train as
hard as I can every time I come to the
gym." Because we're rewarded for hard
work, aren't we? The analogy that I give
is running a marathon. You want to work
hard if you want to do a good time in a
marathon, right? But does that mean you
sprint from the start? No. You pace
yourself, don't you? So you can have any
have a successful entire race. Same with
your long-term plan or your four-weekly
plan or weekly mesocycle, however long
that is. Set yourself up so that you can
finish strong. Not so you can start
strong and then fail every single week
after that. If I said right now, you're
going to do 4 by 6 at your limit, what
do you think you can do? I would have
done 90. 90 kg? Right. I'm going to make
you save that for week three. Week four,
you're going to do 5% more than that or
let's call it 95. Week two, you're going
to do 5% less than that. Week one,
you're going to do 5% less than that.
Does that make sense? Everybody, let's
think about how you're going to move on
week one with 80 kg. You told me you can
do 90, right? How do you think it's
going to look on 80 kg? Yeah, like
you've got reps in reserve. You're going
to walk out of the session feeling like
you could have done more. What do you
think you're going to be able to do on
week two? 85? Of course you can. You can
do 90. Week three, we do what you
originally thought you could do. Week
four, I'm going to take you to 95. So
this is how I illustrate it to you guys.
If I wrote a program for you right now
and said, "Today I want you to do 95 kg
4 by 5." What are you going to do?
Today? Yeah. If I said 95 kg is what I
want, you're going to look at that and
go what? You're going to go, "Oh,
I don't know." Okay? But on week four,
you're going to be able to. Does that
make sense? So therefore, strategically
I set you up conservatively to allow
room for you to familiarize yourself
with the process, the demands of the
program, refine the technique, and by
the time you come into it on week four,
you've got the competency to complete
it. Okay? So that's a tool that I
consider to be a hack, and I use that
language even though it's terrible
language. There's no hacks, there's no
magic pills, but if there was one,
that's it. Use that formula forever and
then new program and start that process
again. Now here's another way of
illustrating this, write this down. Week
one, RPE 7. What's another way of saying
RPE 7? 3 RIR. Week two, RPE 8.
2 RIR. Week three, RPE 9. Week four, RPE
10. 0 RIR. Now here's another strategy.
Four sets of 10 RPE, that ain't
happening. You just shook your head.
Correct? So how can we compromise?
Strategic deload. Halve the volume but
maintain the intensity. Okay? So instead
of doing 4 by 6, you're going to do 2 by
6. That's on week four. Yeah. So that's
our deload via reduction of volume. Not
a not a reduction of intensity. Okay? By
volume. Why did I do that? Anyone know?
The biggest contributor to fatigue is
the accumulation of volume, not
necessarily the intensity. Research
shows us that. The biggest contributor
to fatigue is the accumulation of
volume, not the intensity. However,
where do we start on week one of the
next phase? RPE 7. RPE 7, which is a
reduction of what? Of intensity, isn't
it? Yeah. Intensity and and load, same
thing. Yeah. Great. So we're doing both.
So week four of the program, we send it.
That's a fun week. We go as heavy as we
can. We hit as close to our limit as we
can. So when people ask the question, do
you train to fail or do you not or
should you train to fail or should you
not, what's the answer? Yeah, sometimes.
How do you know what your limitations
are if you've never been there? We need
to learn about ourselves when we train.
This is what makes us more skillful in
the gym. Okay? So it's a strategy of of
intelligently setting ourselves up to go
to our limit. Give ourselves four weeks
to test our limit. Not on week one when
we haven't practiced, we don't
understand the demands of the program.
We don't know how much energy is
required to do four sets of six and then
plus the accessories and then plus
whatever else you've got. And then
you've got squats on Monday, we've got
to do deadlifts as well on Thursday.
We've got to feel that. So start
conservative so we can understand the
demands and condition our body to the
demands before we send it on week four.
I want to send it so hard on week four
that I really want to test myself. I
can't test myself four sets in a row.
Here's my trade-off we have of the sets.
Fun. Then on week one of the new
program, we start again by reduction of
intensity. New exercises. It's not just
like new exercises for no reason, it's
strategic change in exercise and
strategic change in reps. Over the
long-term plan, every phase we're
working on something slightly different.
Higher reps, moderate reps, lower reps,
peak. Okay? So the exercise selection
there needs to be logical progression of
exercises. So I'd do things like high
bar in the hypertrophy phase and then go
to more low bar in the strength phase
and then peak with the low bar as well.
All this is just a separate question.
>> Okay. As you get closer to competition,
do you have less variation? Absolutely.
I have very much no variation. I have
pure specificity as I get closer to
competition. The most intelligent
program could be just the complexes.
Yeah. So if you're a powerlifter, your
peaking week is just complexes. Squat,
bench, dead and get out. Now, within
reason, you can add some low-cost
exercises that can work towards joint
health. So after bench press, we can do
things like rotator cuff. After squats,
you could do things like I don't know, I
wouldn't do anything. Ham curls.
Low-cost exercises. Don't go squats on
peak phase and then heavy leg press and
then walking lunges cuz that's a great
glute builder. No time for building in
this phase. It's time for recovery. Now,
that's like all these really great hacks
in five minutes that deserves a week of
discussion, just so that you know. So
don't just think so that doesn't matter
as much. If you were to just remember
one thing and you just that was it,
you've more than paid for this course
and some. Okay? And you know more than
majority of the fitness industry. Okay?
Apply that principle to your coaching,
to your programming. Set yourself up
conservative to be able to add weight to
the bar every time you come into the
gym. When you finish the mesocycle, so
the last week of the mesocycle, work
towards failure. We need to
strategically test ourselves. Doesn't
[snorts] mean one rep max on week four,
it means if you're doing 4 by 6, test
your limitation on sixes, your 6 RM. Not
not 1 RM at the end of the program.
Okay? Of that given rep set scheme, push
it.